---
Date Created: 5-30-2022 6:18
Last Modified: 5-30-2022 6:18
---
Tags:
## Draft notes
\- beginning striking, beautiful balanced melody (the government) where everything appears fine, military just goes into ww1 strong and confident, no unrest feeling

\- 0:33 second theme occurrence: end of the section of grandness, new beginning of quiet, uneasy 'peace' of a pause before more battle, but also a tiny bit of eeriness as people sense the quiet rumbling of issues and doubt, which begins to grow in the left hand. War is not going well, there is growing despair and hunger, then suddenly the 0:50 \-\> 1:00 surge of war awakens again:

\- chord jarring, escalating quickly, that's world war I, battlefield, bursting intensity, military and gov struggling to stay on top of it all, then it appears that it's their last ditch effort in desperation, giving all they've got

\- bursts into the next section of climax, it's looking bad and even faster than it had started, the air turns bitter and unable to sustain the effort, the voices fall quickly, sorrowful, quickly dying theme from beginning of fatigue and a loss of battle

\- focus switches to new theme of uneasy, restless quiet back at the civilian place that is in perspective of families in drowning in despair, famine, and the death of their fathers, husbands, sons on the battlefield, can hear the left hand still rumbling but distant (background sound of distant war and unrest) while here comes in a new melody that is a lonely but adamant voice of an educated person of high status, calling out to all for a solution to end the death and despair that is from Russia's involvement in the war, call to action to do something to get civilian own voice heard

\- as it dies back down and smoothly segways to the stage of gradual but steady growth, you hear the growing warmth of an increasingly violent beauty of rising power and anger of the incredible masses (we the people\!)

\- anger takes over and it bursts out like an erupting volcano, uncontrollable rage and uprisings everywhere, burning burning burning but still a sense of awe and spectacular beauty through the pain

\- at the step right before climax, the left hand (the people, those who were quiet at the opening theme) erupts in melody, singing the song of revolution, along with it the previously rumbling feeling of violence and uneasiness completely transformed to erupt with the LH melody, which now becomes the main and take over, the people of Russia now taking the stage

at fff the absolute climax of the piece, both LH (represents the people) and RH (the government) equally angry and violent rise and scream at each other, this conflict between them reaching a fever-high pitch, together both fighting tooth and nail to be at the top

\- this level of absolute intensity, unable to sustain itself for long, abruptly dies down (but not linearly/directly, winding road) in falling arcs or zigzag lines, a few last ditch efforts that sometimes rise up and quickly end again, and finally finally finally....

the final scene, a long pan shot of battlefield in Russia, the fields littered with the remnants of the battle that had just taken place, an eerie but also strangely beautiful, but in a sorrowful, soulful way, as the scene is still except for the slow waft of smoke and the tiny glimmers of sparks, all that is left of the fire that had burned it all, the land and soul alike. tiny bodies littered about in the distance, tanks and what is left of buildings in ruins, and slowly the camera pans upward, towards the sky, and fades into the pale, colorless sky into nothingness

Yet still some sort of glimpse hope w/ picardy third

## Essay

The fifth of Rachmaninoff’s second set of etude-tableaux, this monstrous etude is the dramatic climax of both sets, riddled with tumultuous texture, unusual harmonic dissonance, and soaring melodies. Translating to picture pieces, these were the last major works for piano he composed before leaving Russia and his possessions during its 1971 revolution. Rachmaninoff left out the “pictures” in these pieces, so much of it is up to interpretation. This piece seems to resemble the raw tragedy, intensity, and conflict of war.   
In the opening, the thick chordal accompaniment is introduced, commanding rhythm and harmonic motion into narrative storytelling. Composed mostly in triplets despite the common time, the harmony dominates the texture and rhythm of the piece while clashing with the melody’s eighth notes. This is especially prominent at 0:18 (measure 7\) with its first instance of a longer continuous melodic line, before breaking up abruptly with the following two measures, measures 9 and 10\. Here, the accented rising triplet motif is repeated, with an overall descending motion, which hints at the many conflicting motions to come. The temporary emerging of ascending pleas (the triplets) are repeatedly put down and down until pushed into the left hand (measure 11\) as a somber, dying voice buried by the recurring opening theme.   
Because of this mezzoforte transition, performers start the reoccurring main theme in a more somber and subdued manner than the beginning, and the hints of major in the harmony that were nonexistent in the first iteration bring a new color of uneasy “peace” and warmth (0:34, measure 13). Only, this is short-lived with a mini-climax at measure 22 followed by the rather estranged melody starting at measure 26 (1:15), where the harmony resembles a more traditional, distant accompaniment. This establishes a new norm to be gradually broken with the upcoming violent counterpoint, but it itself suggests a new distinct character, somber but insistent, standing alone among the backdrop of violent beauty being murmured in the harmony voicing before becoming a duet.  
Another notable feature of rhythm in relation to harmony and melody is the distinct silence (rest or lack of a new played chord) on the beat of the heavy triplet accompaniment throughout the piece, which allows the melody to rise alone and dominate. This already serves as a striking introduction by being one sole note, which resembles dramatic, solemn openings of other pieces that set the dark tone. However, this piece’s use of momentary silence serves as an integral part of its entire texture, and it suggests that the accompaniment is far more embedded with the melody than what the word “accompaniment” would suggest by taking turns with the melody. This is evident with the journey to the climax when the line between melody and accompaniment at 2:20 blur as the top and an inner voice emerge and overlap, back and forth. The tenuto/accent markings following the inner and top top voice suggests the clashing between forces. The top voice is from fragments of the main theme, the oppressive force previously mentioned that once drowned out the somber pleas. And now, it is in a full-fledged battle with the inner voice as if the masses have risen against the initial force.   
The intensity feels as if it is about to explode, which it does at measure 41 (2:15) with a temporary climax before again diving into the crawling ascent. The clashing harmony and melody simultaneously go off while painstakingly climbing a whole step (C to D), a whole step (D to E), then doubling in harmonic rhythm to two steps a measure, crawling faster and faster to the “true” climax at measure 53 (2:48), the recontextualized main theme now in the left hand, no longer featuring the distinct two-to-three rhythm as the eighth notes have become triplets as well. Now the conflict between melody and harmony, at a fever-high pitch, along with the reversed hand roles, seem to suggest that the previous hints of an oppressive force and the masses are no longer so different, now that both are in-sync. The conclusion, a somber remnant of the tragedy, provides a small glimpse of hope with a picardy third. 

## Connection to Painting
Find another work of art that relates to your chosen piece in some way but that is not itself a piece of music. This can be anything from theater, to film, to literature, to visual art, to dance,and even works from the social or natural sciences. Compare the two works and write a 150-200 word explanation about the relationship between them. Do not merely summarize the non-musical work; provide specific points about how the two works relate.

Ivan Aivazovsky’s "Battle of Chesma at Night" is a painting from 1848\. I found that it was common to associate Rachmaninoff’s Op. 39 No. 5 etude with the clash between forces of nature (i.e., a crashing wave against a cliff) or between forces of nature with mankind, which this painting depicts. The darkness of the night and the tumultuous waves highlighted by the glimmering moon invoke an oppressive atmosphere that is established right at the striking opening of the piece. The blurred line between the low, looming clouds and the thick smog from the monstrous blaze resemble the oppressiveness and dread that the thick, relentless chordal texture brings to the searing, naked melody of the blaze. The naval battle itself, between the Ottoman and Russia in the painting, is at a fiery, erupting climax, similar to the explosive intensity of the etude as it enters its final, thundering iteration of the main theme in the left hand. 

